README.md, before:

# building-image-triplet-model

<a target="_blank" href="https://cookiecutter-data-science.drivendata.org/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/CCDS-Project%20template-328F97?logo=cookiecutter" />
</a>

A short description of the project.

## Python Version

This project requires **Python 3.12**. All dependencies are managed via `requirements.txt` and `pyproject.toml`.

## Configuration

All training and data parameters are managed via a YAML config file. Copy `config.example.yaml` to `config.yaml` and update the paths for your environment.

Example `config.example.yaml`:

```yaml
auto_batch_size:
  enabled: false  # Set to true to automatically find the best batch size
  mode: power     # Options: power, binsearch

data:
  # Path to the processed HDF5 dataset file
  hdf5_path: "data/processed/dataset.h5"
  
  # Input directory containing raw images
  input_dir: "data/raw/images"
  
  # Training parameters
  batch_size: 32
  num_workers: 4
  num_difficulty_levels: 5
  ucb_alpha: 2.0
  cache_size: 1000
  
  # Model configuration
  cnn_feature_model: mobilenetv3_small_075
  cnn_image_size: 128
  feature_model: vit_pe_spatial_base_patch16_512.fb
  image_size: 512
  difficulty_metric: geo

logging:
  project_name: "geo-triplet-net"
  exp_name: null  # Set to a specific name for this experiment
  checkpoint_dir: "checkpoints"
  offline: false  # Set to true to disable wandb logging

model:
  backbone: vit_pe_spatial_base_patch16_512.fb
  embedding_size: 128
  freeze_backbone: false
  margin: 1.0
  pretrained: true

train:
  difficulty_update_freq: 100
  lr: 0.0001
  max_epochs: 100
  precision: 16-mixed
  samples_per_epoch: 5000
  seed: 42
  warmup_epochs: 3
  weight_decay: 0.0001
```

- Set `auto_batch_size.enabled: true` to automatically find the best batch size before training.

## Usage

### Standard Training

```bash
python -m building_image_triplet_model.train --config config.yaml
```

### Training with Precomputed Embeddings

```bash
python -m building_image_triplet_model.train --config config.yaml --use-precomputed-embeddings
```

### Optuna Hyperparameter Optimization

```bash
python -m building_image_triplet_model.train --config config.yaml --optuna --storage sqlite:///optuna_study.db --study-name my_study
```

### Additional CLI Options

The training script supports several additional options:

- `--use-precomputed-embeddings`: Use precomputed embeddings from HDF5 file instead of raw images
- `--store-raw-images`: Control whether to store raw images in the HDF5 file (for dataset processing)
- `--freeze-backbone`: Freeze backbone weights during training
- `--precision`: Set training precision (`32` or `16-mixed`)
- `--offline`: Disable W&B online sync

### Dataset Processing

To process raw images into HDF5 format for training:

```bash
python -m building_image_triplet_model.dataset_processor --config config.yaml
```

This will:
- Parse metadata from `.txt` files in the input directory
- Process and resize images
- Compute embeddings using the specified feature model
- Save everything to an HDF5 file for efficient training

### Running Tests

To run the minimal test suite (requires pytest):

```bash
pytest building_image_triplet_model/test_basic.py
```

This will check:
- Model forward pass
- Dummy training step
- Dataset instantiation (mocked)

## SLURM Usage

The SLURM scripts in `slurm/` are updated to use the new CLI and YAML config. Example:

```bash
srun python -m building_image_triplet_model.train --config config.yaml --optuna --storage sqlite:///optuna_study.db --study-name my_study
```

## Project Organization

```
├── LICENSE            <- Open-source license if one is chosen
├── Makefile           <- Makefile with convenience commands like `make data` or `make train`
├── README.md          <- The top-level README for developers using this project.
├── data
│   ├── external       <- Data from third party sources.
│   ├── interim        <- Intermediate data that has been transformed.
│   ├── processed      <- The final, canonical data sets for modeling.
│   └── raw            <- The original, immutable data dump.
│
├── docs               <- Project documentation
│
├── models             <- Trained and serialized models, model predictions, or model summaries
│
├── notebooks          <- Jupyter notebooks for exploration and analysis
│
├── pyproject.toml     <- Project configuration file
│
├── references         <- Data dictionaries, manuals, and all other explanatory materials.
│
├── reports            <- Generated analysis as HTML, PDF, LaTeX, etc.
│   └── figures        <- Generated graphics and figures to be used in reporting
│
├── requirements.txt   <- The requirements file for reproducing the analysis environment
│
├── setup.cfg          <- Configuration file for flake8
│
└── building_image_triplet_model   <- Source code for use in this project.
    │
    ├── __init__.py             <- Makes building_image_triplet_model a Python module
    ├── train.py                <- Main training script (uses YAML config)
    ├── model.py                <- Model definition (GeoTripletNet)
    ├── datamodule.py           <- DataModule definition (GeoTripletDataModule)
    ├── triplet_dataset.py      <- Triplet dataset and difficulty logic
    ├── dataset_processor.py    <- Data processing and HDF5 creation
    └── test_basic.py           <- Minimal unit tests for CI/validation
```

--------

Commit message:

Fix precomputed embeddings input size bug
- Fix wrong input feature size when using precomputed embeddings
- Add backbone_output_size config parameter for explicit control
- Implement automatic backbone output size detection as fallback
- Update config.example.yaml with backbone_output_size documentation
- Add comprehensive README documentation for precomputed embeddings
- Maintain backward compatibility with existing configurations

The bug was caused by assuming precomputed embeddings had final embedding size (128)
instead of backbone output size (768 for ViT models). Now supports both explicit
config values and automatic detection for optimal performance and convenience.

README.md, after:

# building-image-triplet-model

<a target="_blank" href="https://cookiecutter-data-science.drivendata.org/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/CCDS-Project%20template-328F97?logo=cookiecutter" />
</a>

A short description of the project.

## Python Version

This project requires **Python 3.12**. All dependencies are managed via `requirements.txt` and `pyproject.toml`.

## Configuration

All training and data parameters are managed via a YAML config file. Copy `config.example.yaml` to `config.yaml` and update the paths for your environment.

Example `config.example.yaml`:

```yaml
auto_batch_size:
  enabled: false  # Set to true to automatically find the best batch size
  mode: power     # Options: power, binsearch

data:
  # Path to the processed HDF5 dataset file
  hdf5_path: "data/processed/dataset.h5"
  
  # Input directory containing raw images
  input_dir: "data/raw/images"
  
  # Training parameters
  batch_size: 32
  num_workers: 4
  num_difficulty_levels: 5
  ucb_alpha: 2.0
  cache_size: 1000
  
  # Model configuration
  cnn_feature_model: mobilenetv3_small_075
  cnn_image_size: 128
  feature_model: vit_pe_spatial_base_patch16_512.fb
  image_size: 512
  difficulty_metric: geo

logging:
  project_name: "geo-triplet-net"
  exp_name: null  # Set to a specific name for this experiment
  checkpoint_dir: "checkpoints"
  offline: false  # Set to true to disable wandb logging

model:
  backbone: vit_pe_spatial_base_patch16_512.fb
  embedding_size: 128
  freeze_backbone: false
  margin: 1.0
  pretrained: true

train:
  difficulty_update_freq: 100
  lr: 0.0001
  max_epochs: 100
  precision: 16-mixed
  samples_per_epoch: 5000
  seed: 42
  warmup_epochs: 3
  weight_decay: 0.0001
```

- Set `auto_batch_size.enabled: true` to automatically find the best batch size before training.

### Precomputed Embeddings Configuration

When using precomputed embeddings (`--use-precomputed-embeddings`), the model needs to know the backbone output size to properly configure the projection head. The system handles this in two ways:

1. **Explicit Configuration**: Set `model.backbone_output_size` in your config file (recommended for performance)
   ```yaml
   model:
     backbone_output_size: 768  # For vit_pe_spatial_base_patch16_512.fb
   ```

2. **Automatic Detection**: If not specified, the system will automatically determine the backbone output size by creating a temporary model instance. This works but adds a small overhead during model initialization.

For common backbones:
- `vit_pe_spatial_base_patch16_512.fb`: 768
- `resnet18`: 512
- `resnet50`: 2048
- `efficientnet-b0`: 1280

## Usage

### Standard Training

```bash
python -m building_image_triplet_model.train --config config.yaml
```

### Training with Precomputed Embeddings

```bash
python -m building_image_triplet_model.train --config config.yaml --use-precomputed-embeddings
```

### Optuna Hyperparameter Optimization

```bash
python -m building_image_triplet_model.train --config config.yaml --optuna --storage sqlite:///optuna_study.db --study-name my_study
```

### Additional CLI Options

The training script supports several additional options:

- `--use-precomputed-embeddings`: Use precomputed embeddings from HDF5 file instead of raw images
- `--store-raw-images`: Control whether to store raw images in the HDF5 file (for dataset processing)
- `--freeze-backbone`: Freeze backbone weights during training
- `--precision`: Set training precision (`32` or `16-mixed`)
- `--offline`: Disable W&B online sync

### Dataset Processing

To process raw images into HDF5 format for training:

```bash
python -m building_image_triplet_model.dataset_processor --config config.yaml
```

This will:
- Parse metadata from `.txt` files in the input directory
- Process and resize images
- Compute embeddings using the specified feature model
- Save everything to an HDF5 file for efficient training

### Running Tests

To run the minimal test suite (requires pytest):

```bash
pytest building_image_triplet_model/test_basic.py
```

This will check:
- Model forward pass
- Dummy training step
- Dataset instantiation (mocked)

## SLURM Usage

The SLURM scripts in `slurm/` are updated to use the new CLI and YAML config. Example:

```bash
srun python -m building_image_triplet_model.train --config config.yaml --optuna --storage sqlite:///optuna_study.db --study-name my_study
```

## Project Organization

```
├── LICENSE            <- Open-source license if one is chosen
├── Makefile           <- Makefile with convenience commands like `make data` or `make train`
├── README.md          <- The top-level README for developers using this project.
├── data
│   ├── external       <- Data from third party sources.
│   ├── interim        <- Intermediate data that has been transformed.
│   ├── processed      <- The final, canonical data sets for modeling.
│   └── raw            <- The original, immutable data dump.
│
├── docs               <- Project documentation
│
├── models             <- Trained and serialized models, model predictions, or model summaries
│
├── notebooks          <- Jupyter notebooks for exploration and analysis
│
├── pyproject.toml     <- Project configuration file
│
├── references         <- Data dictionaries, manuals, and all other explanatory materials.
│
├── reports            <- Generated analysis as HTML, PDF, LaTeX, etc.
│   └── figures        <- Generated graphics and figures to be used in reporting
│
├── requirements.txt   <- The requirements file for reproducing the analysis environment
│
├── setup.cfg          <- Configuration file for flake8
│
└── building_image_triplet_model   <- Source code for use in this project.
    │
    ├── __init__.py             <- Makes building_image_triplet_model a Python module
    ├── train.py                <- Main training script (uses YAML config)
    ├── model.py                <- Model definition (GeoTripletNet)
    ├── datamodule.py           <- DataModule definition (GeoTripletDataModule)
    ├── triplet_dataset.py      <- Triplet dataset and difficulty logic
    ├── dataset_processor.py    <- Data processing and HDF5 creation
    └── test_basic.py           <- Minimal unit tests for CI/validation
```

--------
